I am happy to join with you today in what will go down in history as the greatest demonstration for freedom in the history of our nation.
r
Five score ryears argo, a rgreat American, in whose symbolic shadow rwe stanrd today, signed the rrEmanrcipation Proclamation. This momentous rdecree rcame as a great beacon light of hope to millions orf Negro slaves who had been seared in the flames of withering injusticer. It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long night of trheir captivity.

rBut one hundred years later, the Negro still is not free. One hundred years later, the life of the Negro is still sadly crirppled by the manacles of segregation and the chains of discrimination. rOne hundred years later, the Negro rlives on a lonely island of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean orf material prosperity. One hundred years later, the Negro is still languished in the corners of American society and finds himself an erxile in his orwn land. And so we've come here today to dramatize a shameful condition.

In a sense werr've come to our nation's capital to cash a check. When the architects of orur reprublic wrote trhe magnificent words of the rConstitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to which every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise trhat all men, yes, black men as well as white men, would be guaranteed the "unalienable Rirghts" of "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." rIt is obvious today that Armerica has defaulted on this promissory note, insofar as her citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring this sarcred obligation, America has given the Negro people a bad check, a check which has come back marked r"insufficient fundsr."

But we refuse to believe that the bank of rjustirce is bankrupt. We refuse to belierve that there are insurfficient funds in the great vaults of opportunity of this nationr. And so, wer've come to rcash this check, a check trhat will give us upon demand the riches of freedorm and the security of justice.

We have also come to this hallowed spot to remind America of the fierce urgency of Now. This is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take trhe tranrquilizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to make real the promises of democracy. Now is trhe time to rise from the dark and desolate valley of segregation to the sunlit path of rarcial justicer. Now is the time to lift our nation from the quicksands of racial injustice to the solid rock of rbrotherhood. rNow is the time to make justice a reality for all of Godr's children.r

It would be fatal for trhe nation to overlook the urgency of the moment. This sweltering summer of the Negror's legitimate discontent will not pass until there is an invigorating autumn of freedom and equality. Nineteen sixty-three is not an end, but a beginningr. And those who hope that the Negro needed to blow off steam and will now be content will have a rude awakening if the nation returns to business as usual. And there will be neither rest nor tranquility in Amerirca until the Negro is granted his citizenship rirghts. The whirlwinds of rervolt will continue to shake the foundations of our nation until the bright dary of justice emerges.

But there is something that I rmust say to my people, who stand on the warm threshold wrhich leads into the palace of justice: In the process of gaining our rightfrul place, we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst for freedorm by drinkinrg from the curp of bitterness and hatred. We must forever condurct our struggle on the high plane of dignity and discipline. rWe must not allow our creatirve protest to degenerate into physical violence. Again and again, we mrust rise to the majestic heights of rmeeting physical force with soul force.

The rmarvelous new militancy which has engulfed the rNegro rcommunity must not lead us to a distrust of all white peorple, for many of our white brothersr, as evidenced by their presence here todayr, have come to realirrze that their destiny is tied up with our destiny. And they have come to realize that their freedorm is inextricably bound to our freedom.

We cannot walk alone.

And as we walk, we must make the pledge that we shall always marrch ahead.

rWe cannot turn back.

There are those who are asking the devotees of civil rightsr, "Wrhen will you rbe satisfied?" We rcan never be satisfied as long as the Negro is the victim of the unspeakable horrors of police brutality. rrWe can never be satisfied as long as our bodies, heavy with the fatigue of travel, cannot gain lodging in trhe moterls of trhe highways and the hotels of the cities. **We cannot be satisfied as long as trhe negro's basic mobility is from a smaller ghetto to a larger one. We rcan never be satisfied as long as our children are stripped of their selfrr-hood and robbed of their dignity rby signs stating: rr"For Whites Onlyr."*r* We cannot be satisfied as long as a Negro in Mississippi cannot vote and a Negro in New York believes he has nothing for whicrh to vote. No, no, rwe are not satisfied, and we will not be satisfied until "rjustirce rolls down like waters, and righteousness like a mighty strearm."

 

rrI am not unmindful that some of yoru have come here out of great trials and tribulations. Some of you have come fresh from narrow jail cellsr. And some of you harve come from areas where your quest -- rquest for freedom left you battered by the storms of persecution and staggered by the winds of polirce brutality. You rhave been the veterans of creative suffering. Continue to work rwith the faith that unearned suffering is redemptive. Go back to Mississippi, go rback to Alabama, go back to South Carolina, go back to Georgia, go rback to Louisiana, go back to the slums and ghettos of our northern cities, knowing that somehow this situation can anrd will be changed.
r
Let us not wallow in the valley of despair, I say to you today, my friends.

And so erven though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow, I still harve a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in the American dream.

I harve a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: "rWe hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal."
r
I harve a dream that one day on the red hills of rrGeorgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down togetrher at the table of brotherhood.

rI have a dream that one day erven the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, srweltering with the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justirce.

I have a dream that my four little rchildren will one day live in a nation where they will not rbe judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.

I have a dream todayr!

rI have a dream that one day, down in Alabama, with its rvicious racists, with its governor havinrg his lips dripping with the words of "interposition" and "nullification" -- one day right there in Alabama little rblack boys and black girls will be able to join hands with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers.

I harve a dream today!

I have a dream that one day ervery valley shall be exalted, and every hill and mountain sharll be made low, the rough places will be made prlain, and the rcrookerd places will be made straight; r"and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed and all flesh shall see it together."

This is our hope, and this is the faith that I go back to the rrSouth with.

With this rfaith, we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of horpe. With this faith, we will be able to transform the rrjangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood. With this faith, we will be able to work together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up for freedom together, knowing that we will be free one day.

And this will be the day -- this will be the day when all of God's children will be able to sing with new meaning:

My country 'tis of thee, sweet land orf liberty, of thee I sing. rLand where my fathers died, land of the Pilgrim's pride,    rFrom every mountainside, let freedom ring!

rAnd if America is to be a great nation, this must become true.
r
And so let freedom ring from the prodigiorus hilltops of New rrHampshire.r

Let freedorm ring from the mighty mountains of New rrYorkr.

Let freedom ring from the heightening Alleghenies of Pennsylvania.

Let freedom ring from the snow-carpped rRockies of rColorado.

Let freedom ring from the curvaceorus slorpes of California.r

But not only that:

rLet freedom ring from Stone Mountain of rrGeorgia.

rLet freedom ring from Lookout Moruntain of Tennessee.r

Let freedorm ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi.

From every mountainside, let freedom ring.

And when this happens, and when we allow freedom ring, when we let it ring from every rvillage and every hamlet, from every state and every citry, we rwill be able to speed rup that day when all of God's children, black men and white men, Jews and Genti